.TH MICROGPT-CPP 7 "2026-02-12" "microgpt-cpp 1.0.0" "microgpt-cpp Simple API Reference"
.SH NAME
microgpt-cpp \- A minimal C++20 implementation of GPT training and inference
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <microgpt/microgpt.h>
.sp
.B Training:
.br
auto docs = microgpt::load_docs("data/names.txt");
.br
microgpt::Tokenizer tokenizer;
.br
tokenizer.fit(docs);
.br
microgpt::Config config{...};
.br
microgpt::GPT model(config);
.br
microgpt::Adam optimizer(...);
.br
.sp
for (int step = 0; step < num_steps; ++step) {
.br
    microgpt::ValueStorage storage;
.br
    auto tokens = tokenizer.encode(docs[step % docs.size()]);
.br
    double loss = model.train_step(tokens, optimizer, storage, num_steps);
.br
}
.br
model.save_weights("model.bin", tokenizer);
.sp
.B Inference:
.br
auto [model, tokenizer] = microgpt::GPT::load_weights("model.bin");
.br
auto tokens = model.generate(tokenizer.BOS, max_len, temperature);
.br
std::string text = tokenizer.decode(tokens);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B microgpt-cpp
is a faithful C++20 port of Andrej Karpathy's microGPT, providing a minimal, 
dependency-free implementation of GPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) 
training and inference using a graph-based scalar autograd approach.
.PP
The library is designed to be educational and easy to understand, translating
the original Python implementation line-by-line to modern C++20 without
optimizations, CUDA, or SIMD. It uses a scalar autograd system with the
.B Value
class for automatic differentiation.
.PP
.B Original Python implementation by Andrej Karpathy:
.br
https://gist.github.com/karpathy/8627fe009c40f57531cb18360106ce95
.SH API REFERENCE
.SS Core Classes
.TP
.B Config
Model configuration structure:
.nf
struct Config {
    int vocab_size;   // Vocabulary size
    int n_embd;       // Embedding dimension  
    int n_head;       // Number of attention heads
    int n_layer;      // Number of transformer layers
    int block_size;   // Maximum sequence length
};
.fi
.TP
.B GPT
Main model class with the following methods:
.RS
.TP
.B GPT(const Config& config)
Construct a new GPT model with the given configuration.
.TP
.B double train_step(const std::vector<int>& tokens, Adam& optimizer, ValueStorage& storage, int total_steps)
Perform one training step on a token sequence. Returns the loss value.
The storage parameter should be a fresh ValueStorage instance for each step.
The total_steps parameter is used for cosine learning rate decay scheduling.
.TP
.B std::vector<int> generate(int start_token, int max_length, double temperature = 1.0)
Generate a sequence autoregressively starting from start_token. The temperature
parameter controls randomness (lower = more deterministic, higher = more random).
Returns a vector of generated token IDs.
.TP
.B void save_weights(const std::string& filename, const Tokenizer& tokenizer) const
Save model weights and configuration to a binary file, along with the tokenizer.
.TP
.B static std::pair<GPT, Tokenizer> load_weights(const std::string& filename)
Load a pre-trained model and tokenizer from a binary file. Returns a pair
containing the model and tokenizer.
.RE
.TP
.B Tokenizer
Character-level tokenizer with the following methods:
.RS
.TP
.B void fit(const std::vector<std::string>& docs)
Build the vocabulary from a collection of documents.
.TP
.B std::vector<int> encode(const std::string& text) const
Convert text to a sequence of token IDs. Adds BOS (beginning of sequence)
tokens at start and end.
.TP
.B std::string decode(const std::vector<int>& tokens) const
Convert a sequence of token IDs back to text, removing BOS tokens.
.RE
.TP
.B Adam
Adam optimizer with cosine learning rate schedule:
.RS
.TP
.B Adam(double lr, double beta1, double beta2, double eps)
Construct an Adam optimizer with the given hyperparameters:
.br
lr: learning rate
.br
beta1: exponential decay rate for first moment (default: 0.9)
.br
beta2: exponential decay rate for second moment (default: 0.95)
.br
eps: small constant for numerical stability (default: 1e-8)
.TP
.B void init(size_t num_params)
Initialize optimizer state for the given number of parameters.
.TP
.B void step(std::vector<Value*>& params, int total_steps)
Perform one optimization step, updating all parameters.
.RE
.TP
.B ValueStorage
Arena allocator for Value objects in the computation graph. Should be
created fresh for each training step to prevent memory accumulation.
Automatically manages the lifetime of intermediate computation nodes.
.SS Utility Functions
.TP
.B std::vector<std::string> load_docs(const std::string& filename)
Load documents from a text file, one per line. Returns a vector of strings.
.TP
.B void shuffle(std::vector<std::string>& docs)
Randomly shuffle a vector of documents in place.
.TP
.B std::vector<Value*> softmax(const std::vector<Value*>& logits, ValueStorage& storage)
Apply softmax function to a vector of logits, returning normalized probabilities.
Includes numerical stability improvements.
.SS Layer Functions
.TP
.B std::vector<Value*> rmsnorm(const std::vector<Value*>& x, ValueStorage& storage)
Apply RMS (Root Mean Square) normalization to input vector x.
.TP
.B std::vector<Value*> linear(const std::vector<Value*>& x, const std::vector<std::vector<Value>>& w, ValueStorage& storage)
Apply linear transformation (matrix-vector multiplication) using weight matrix w.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Simple Training Example
.nf
#include <microgpt/microgpt.h>
using namespace microgpt;

int main() {
    // 1. Load and prepare dataset
    auto docs = load_docs("data/names.txt");
    shuffle(docs);
    
    Tokenizer tokenizer;
    tokenizer.fit(docs);
    
    // 2. Configure model
    Config config{
        .vocab_size = tokenizer.vocab_size,
        .n_embd = 16,
        .n_head = 4,
        .n_layer = 1,
        .block_size = 8
    };
    
    GPT model(config);
    
    // 3. Initialize optimizer
    Adam optimizer(1e-2, 0.9, 0.95, 1e-8);
    optimizer.init(model.state_dict.get_all_params().size());
    
    // 4. Training loop
    for (int step = 0; step < 500; ++step) {
        ValueStorage storage;  // Fresh storage each step
        
        const auto tokens = tokenizer.encode(
            docs[step % docs.size()]
        );
        
        double loss = model.train_step(tokens, optimizer, storage, num_steps);
        
        if ((step + 1) % 10 == 0) {
            std::cout << "step " << (step + 1) 
                     << " | loss " << loss << std::endl;
        }
    }
    
    // 5. Save trained model
    model.save_weights("model_weights.bin", tokenizer);
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SS Simple Inference Example
.nf
#include <microgpt/microgpt.h>
using namespace microgpt;

int main() {
    // 1. Load pre-trained model
    auto [model, tokenizer] = GPT::load_weights("model_weights.bin");
    
    // 2. Generate samples
    const double temperature = 0.5;
    
    for (int i = 0; i < 20; ++i) {
        auto tokens = model.generate(
            tokenizer.BOS,
            model.config.block_size,
            temperature
        );
        
        std::string sample = tokenizer.decode(tokens);
        std::cout << "sample " << (i + 1) 
                 << ": " << sample << std::endl;
    }
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SS Training with Custom Configuration
.nf
#include <microgpt/microgpt.h>
using namespace microgpt;

int main() {
    // Load dataset
    auto docs = load_docs("data/shakespeare.txt");
    shuffle(docs);
    
    // Create tokenizer
    Tokenizer tokenizer;
    tokenizer.fit(docs);
    
    // Configure a larger model
    Config config{
        .vocab_size = tokenizer.vocab_size,
        .n_embd = 64,        // Larger embedding
        .n_head = 8,         // More attention heads
        .n_layer = 4,        // More layers
        .block_size = 128    // Longer context
    };
    
    GPT model(config);
    std::cout << "Model parameters: " 
             << model.state_dict.get_all_params().size() 
             << std::endl;
    
    // Train with custom learning rate
    Adam optimizer(5e-3, 0.9, 0.98, 1e-9);
    optimizer.init(model.state_dict.get_all_params().size());
    
    const int num_steps = 2000;
    
    for (int step = 0; step < num_steps; ++step) {
        ValueStorage storage;
        
        const std::string& doc = docs[step % docs.size()];
        const auto tokens = tokenizer.encode(doc);
        
        double loss = model.train_step(tokens, optimizer, storage, num_steps);
        
        if ((step + 1) % 100 == 0) {
            std::cout << "step " << (step + 1) << "/" << num_steps
                     << " | loss " << std::fixed 
                     << std::setprecision(4) << loss << std::endl;
        }
    }
    
    model.save_weights("shakespeare_model.bin", tokenizer);
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SS Temperature-Controlled Generation
.nf
#include <microgpt/microgpt.h>
using namespace microgpt;

int main() {
    auto [model, tokenizer] = GPT::load_weights("model_weights.bin");
    
    // Compare different temperatures
    std::vector<double> temperatures = {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5};
    
    for (double temp : temperatures) {
        std::cout << "\\nTemperature " << temp << ":\\n";
        
        for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {
            auto tokens = model.generate(
                tokenizer.BOS,
                model.config.block_size,
                temp
            );
            
            std::cout << "  " << tokenizer.decode(tokens) << std::endl;
        }
    }
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH ARCHITECTURE
The GPT model implements a simplified transformer architecture with the following
components:
.TP
.B Token and Position Embeddings
Each token is embedded into a continuous vector space, with positional information
added to preserve sequence order.
.TP
.B Transformer Layers
Each layer contains:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
RMSNorm (Root Mean Square Normalization)
.IP \(bu 3
Multi-head causal self-attention with KV cache
.IP \(bu 3
Residual connections
.IP \(bu 3
MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) with ReLU² activation
.RE
.TP
.B Output Projection
Final linear layer projects to vocabulary logits for next-token prediction.
.PP
The autograd system uses the
.B Value
class to represent scalar nodes in a computation graph. The
.B ValueStorage
class manages these nodes using std::deque to ensure pointer stability during
graph construction and backpropagation.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B include/microgpt/microgpt.h
Main umbrella header that includes all components
.TP
.B include/microgpt/value.h
Scalar autograd Value class and ValueStorage
.TP
.B include/microgpt/model.h
GPT model class with Config and StateDict
.TP
.B include/microgpt/layers.h
Neural network layer functions (RMSNorm, Linear)
.TP
.B include/microgpt/optimizer.h
Adam optimizer implementation
.TP
.B include/microgpt/utils.h
Utility functions (tokenizer, softmax, data loading)
.TP
.B examples/train_simple.cpp
Simple 69-line training example
.TP
.B examples/infer_simple.cpp
Simple 27-line inference example
.TP
.B examples/train.cpp
Detailed training example with explicit loss computation
.TP
.B examples/infer.cpp
Detailed inference example with manual weight loading
.SH BUILDING
.nf
# Clone the repository
git clone git@github.com:EdgeOfAssembly/microgpt-cpp.git
cd microgpt-cpp

# Build with CMake
cmake -B build && make -j$(nproc) -C build

# Run examples
cd build
./train_simple
./infer_simple
.fi
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B Memory Management
Each training step should use a fresh
.B ValueStorage
instance. The storage goes out of scope after the backward pass, cleaning up
the computation graph. This prevents memory accumulation during training.
.TP
.B Performance
This is an educational implementation prioritizing clarity over speed. It uses
scalar operations without BLAS, SIMD, or GPU acceleration. For production use,
consider the planned optimizations in future releases.
.TP
.B Numerical Stability
The implementation includes safeguards against NaN and infinity values, with
checks in softmax, RMSNorm, and other operations. Temperature scaling should
be positive and non-zero.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/EdgeOfAssembly/microgpt-cpp/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
.B Project Repository
https://github.com/EdgeOfAssembly/microgpt-cpp
.TP
.B Original microGPT (Python)
https://gist.github.com/karpathy/8627fe009c40f57531cb18360106ce95
.TP
.B Attention Is All You Need (Transformer paper)
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
.TP
.B GPT-2 Paper
https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf
.SH AUTHOR
EdgeOfAssembly
.PP
Based on microGPT by Andrej Karpathy
.br
Original Python implementation: https://gist.github.com/karpathy/8627fe009c40f57531cb18360106ce95
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2026 EdgeOfAssembly
.PP
MIT License - See LICENSE file for details
.PP
This is a derivative work based on Andrej Karpathy's microGPT, distributed
under the MIT License.
